And I guess everybody wants to know how it is that you came to start writing books at this juncture of your tenure.
Well, there's a myth that I started writing at the age of 70, and it's quite untrue, but it's a fairy story.
I always worked all my life on and off to amuse myself.
And it was only when I was in my 50s that my husband said to me, look, stop throwing things away and start getting published.
And I did have a couple of children's books published.
And then he died and I blocked for about five years.
And then I wrote my first novel, which was shown to, I think, five or six publishers who refused it.
And then I found Macmillan and they took it.
So everybody thinks I wrote it when I was 70, and it had been written when I was young.
We're fine, I'm just checking.
You can just keep on, I'm just checking my tape.
And they think I started writing at 70, which is not, as I say, true.
It's something I've done on and off all my life as a therapist, because I enjoyed writing.
When I had a husband and children and housed around, it came last.
And I didn't have time.
But then when I started getting published, I had more time.
And since my husband died, I've got much more time.
And he encouraged me a lot.
And a writer friend of mine, Antonia White, encouraged me a lot.
And so having had one novel published, my editor said it was
got any other ideas.
I said, yes, I'm halfway through another, so he said, please finish it, and that's what I got there.
I didn't just start at the Serpentier.
I just started getting published, and then I'm gradually getting known of that bit.
Well, it's quite amazing.
I think that it's not the circumstance of your beginning to publish at the Angel Seminary, but the quality of the work.
But I think, you know, by the time you're married, you've had so much experience in life, which is the fifth truth.
Yeah, but writing is not something everybody is able to do, however.
No, but an awful lot of people try, and a lot of people write who can't write.
Isn't that the truth?
I think probably most, all my life when I was writing for my own pleasure, I was teaching myself to write.
And evolving my own style.
And your style is charming and engaging, but you seem to think a lot about your characters.
I mean, it's not just writing to write a good sentence.
You really love doing some very sophisticated character development.
I know I'm quite good at dialogue.
I listen a lot to people.
I'm in an awkward situation now.
I have people watching me and listening to me, but I've spent most of my life of a fly on the wall listening to other people and watching other people and paying attention, especially to the language that changes for the whole time.
The use of English is changing from year to year, month to month almost.
And there are some words that I never would use, but I know they're going to be out of passion anymore.
Six months, some expressions have become popular.
Do you see what you do as a form of social comedy at all, as someone suggested?
I only write about people I think I know, who amuse me.
I love the hypocrisy of people.
conversation.
They say one thing and they mean another.
I love that.
Well, you say you write about people you think you know.
Do you think that these people who think they know you see themselves in your book?
No, I don't.
And I don't write about real people who I have known.
I wouldn't do that or I wouldn't have any friends.
I invent people and I know or think I know people's moods and attitudes, social attitudes,
and the hypocrisy of thinking, which amuses me very much.
But I enjoy it.
But now, as I say, I'm finding it quite embarrassing to be listened to and watched myself.
Right now, what is that?
Well, I'm naturally rather a shy person.
I may not care if I hide that.
But to be able to watch and observe, I find it quite scary.
I understand if there's some talk about, are they actually doing some television productions of these?
Yes, they have.
They've done, I think it's four or five of my books now, and I've only really been happy with one.
But you understand, of course, that
It's out of your hands at that point anyway.
Terrible.
The television people take over, the director and the producer take over.
And I have learned that I've got to have it written into my contract, that I've got to be consulted about all sorts of stupid things, like what people were.
And I've got to have a really good scriptwriter.
I've been lucky in that several times.
Even when you've got a very good scriptwriter, you're not safe with what's seen on the screen.
Now, from this book, I know very little about your life, but I have to assume that gardening is essential for your own... I love gardening.
I've got a very tiny, what I call a London gardener.
I live in a country in a very small town, and I've got a tiny walled garden.
I love it.
And before that, I had a bigger one.
It's a very therapeutic occupation.
My wife is the same way.
She goes out... Something to do with bonding down.
The blood goes to her head and makes her think.
And she loves flowers.
She's not particularly keen on vegetables.
We can buy vegetables at the food stand.
I've never been able to grow vegetables successfully, but I do grow flowers.
I like that.
You mentioned therapy, but I think you see the garden here almost as metaphor.
Yes.
She's building, restoring something.
And maybe tell me a little bit about, you know, the process.
It's more than just seeing people that you know.
It's also building a story.
Well, this book, I mean, really, it's about pain, isn't it?
It's about suffering and loss and the partial recovery of two wounded people getting together.
But the way the book started was where I got the idea of the book.
I was going up to London on the train, and I did see a sheep on his back on the field.
And I've often in my life picked up a sheep, which they get, they've bred so big now, they get on our backs and can't get out, as they would if they were natural.
And I thought, what sort of person would have the courage to stop the train, which I haven't got.
It's beautiful.
either have to be insane or in a state of trauma.
And when you're in a state of trauma, you don't care what you do.
So I have invented this girl in a state of trauma and grief.
And the whole book started from that, from the sheep.
Because you certainly believe in coincidence, too, the fact that they're able to... I say in that that it's unlikely, but the whole of life is coincidence.
I mean, people get jobs through coincidence, friends, and another friend who's heard of a job, and a few might like, and that kind of thing.
It's all coincidence, isn't it?
It's amazing how often it's there.
Of course.
I think also that your books, you certainly profile a city.
London becomes characters in its own way.
Yes.
And that's a very, you know, how often do you see a city profiled in the description?
It's a part of London I know very intimately and have lived in.
My children always laugh at me because they say, when we know Chelsea and I wish it to Kensington on the West End, because now everybody, because the price of living is so huge, they live scattered all around London.
So that is my part of London I wrote about, and they are very well.
Do you look at society with an amused eye yourself?
I do.
I love listening to people.
I love listening to conversations and watching people and guessing at some motives.
Something I have enjoyed doing for years is to be walking down a street in New York or sitting in a bar someplace.
and just picking up a fragment of a conversation.
Just a fragment.
Oh, yes.
And trying to make a narrative out of this.
Trying to fill in just the one or two sentences that you hear.
They might be very pregnant sentences.
Absolutely.
And the whole character will grow after that snippet of conversation I've overheard.
The whole character may grow after this.
And then the story becomes... You invent the story.
Maybe you'd even be disappointed with the real story.
Exactly, yes.
Or you'll never know it.
You never know why you've heard this exclamation.
Have you kind of jotted things down through the years?
No, not really.
I do make notes when I'm working on a book.
I make notes on my shopping list, on my newspaper, on the book I'm reading.
a notebook by my bed, and I know those brilliant thoughts I have in the night, which are quite useless when you wake up in the morning, I write all of them down.
The use of words I'm really interested in, and the movement language, the development language.
I have a lot of friends who are, most of my friends are in their 50s, or the children are still at school or at university, and I listen to the language growing among the young.
I find that fascinating.
Are you generally an optimistic person?
I worry about the state of the world.
I worry about population explosion very much.
I was talking about it recently.
I'm sure it's the same in Boston or New York, any big city.
I was walking around London, driving around London a couple of years ago, and I
past my grandparents' house, which was a house of one family.
It's now 14 apartments.
And the house, so that means minimum 14 cars in London.
And the house I lived in when I was first married in 1937.
It's now six apartments.
And the whole of London has exploded like that.
Too many people, too many cars.
And then my concern is to see
In Japan, you have an oil gas attack by their own people.
God, it sounds right.
And in this country, we have, I mean, everybody, it was almost okay if it had been a Mideastern bomb blast.
I said, thank God it was an American.
But it's an American, a white American who blows up his children.
I mean, this is what terrifies me.
We're going to kill each other.
with nerve gas, with bombs, with nuclear weapons.
And of course, I'm sure a lot of it has to do with overpopulation.
How are these poor Africans going to feed themselves?
I had to interview with Doris Lessing last fall.
Her concern is that we introduced this corn over there that allows more people, the populations to grow quadruple.
We've put the cart before the horse, and we've stopped babies dying, but we've now given them to eat when they've grown up.
There's only one place I've heard of which is working, and that's Kerala, South India, which has got a so-called communist government, and they limit their families to two children.
Everybody's listening to it.
This is in India?
Yes.
I don't think the Indians were alert to this.
I mean, all the rest of India is, you know, out of control.
Out of control.
But in Kerala, they limit their families to two.
The girls go to school as well as the boys and get educated.
It's a very good climate, so they grow a lot of food.
If you're poor, you go to the state shop and you can always get your food.
If you have a bit more money, you go to the other shop.
And it works.
I have a son who goes there a lot.
He's the only place that's so-called communist, and he's just a version of liberalism, communism, whatever.
How do you feel about these comparisons with Jane Austen?
I'm very flattered.
I must say.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
You're welcome.
No, I'm extremely flattered.
I love Jane Austen, but I held off.
I'm very contrary by nature.
I was always being told when I was young to read Jane Austen by my mother, and I never did.
And I came to her very late.
She's a wonderful writer.
I was a literature major, Englishologist.
I read her, you know, in about 1920.
You know, that was a good age.
I've gone back to her with great pleasure.
She's wonderful.
And I just did an interview last week with Patrick O'Brien, you know.
Yes.
And his work is often sometimes compared.
He can say, is that the greatest compliment?
She's an enormous compliment.
Huge compliment.
She's so witty and so observant.
When you started writing these stories, I mean, I guess, does your success surprise you?
Absolutely.
And I can't, because I'm so old, lived so long without it, I find it difficult to take it seriously.
I mean, I'm very amused when people say, you know, compare me with Jane Austen or write a book.
And you mentioned how gardening is a therapeutic exercise.
Would you say that writing started out a lot in much the same manner for you?
Writing, I do.
Yes, it was.
a sort of therapy I felt a compulsory.
I think it's a form of illness.
Anybody not quite in my right mind wants to be a writer.
I look upon it as a sort of disease I can't do without it.
I used to go to bed and tell my children I was ill and I had flu, don't come near me.
I wanted to write.
Do you think that you're writing for yourself or do you have a certain reader in mind?
Never.
I'll never thank my audience, or if I have one, at all.
I'd write purely pleased myself.
It's the kind of book that you'd enjoy reading, perhaps.
I don't know.
It's just a situation I want to create and see if I can sort it out.
And when you're creating these, because since the sequence of novels has started to be published, I mean, you've been exceedingly prolific, I mean.
What are you doing?
About one a year or perhaps?
Not quite, but I've had nine.
Nine?
Nine in 14 years, yes.
Which is not bad.
There's about one every 18 months or whatever.
Where was I going?
I was asking the question.
But apparently they come very easily to you.
Do you get into them?
No, not really.
Not really easily.
It fits and starts as the characters develop, and I cannot harry it.
I don't write work as fast as I did.
My first novel had been written about five years before it was published.
Really?
And refused by a lot of publishers.
They only think I wrote a book a year, and I was already...
about a third into the next novel when I chose that one.
And that came out a year later.
So then they think I wrote a book a year, but it's not quite true.
And how did it come to pass that you were able to, after so much, not so much, but after rejection?
Just persistence.
I think my agent had said to me, I've shown your manuscripts through.
They've been refused by five publishers, and publishing is a bit sad at the moment.
I don't want to show them to any more publishers.
And I had met somebody at Macmillan who had been kind to me about a children's book of mine, and had said, as all publishers do, this is not for our lists, and if you write anything else, you'd love to see it, which is a way to get you out of their office.
And I wrote to him, and I said, I now have a novel, and would you look at it?
And he wrote and said, do send it to me.
And he was actually head of crime of Macmillan, but he had a new fiction editor who'd arrived the week before, who's still my editor.
He freelances for me.
And he read my manuscript, and he took it to this young man, James Hare, and said, I think you'll like this.
And he took me on.
But the joke was that
It took him about five years to tell him.
For the next year, I worried terribly because he said lots of people can write one book and the next one.
I was 70 years old.
It's a risk to take on somebody of 70.
I heard an editor saying the other day, we never take anybody over the age of 25.
Come on.
This is a head of fiction as a paper, Robert McCrum.
It's disgraceful.
Anyway, my editor worried and bit his nails for a year, because I wouldn't tell you to say, how's the book?
And I'd say, you'll see it when it's finished.
And when I had finished it, I sent it to him.
And he was so enthusiastic, I thought he'd gone mad.
And I said, it was relief, of course, that it wasn't bad.
And...
I remember saying to him, I'm not going to believe what you're saying.
If you write, put it in writing.
And he sat down and he wrote me a six-page letter.
And about five years later, he said, now I can tell you.
For a whole year, I'm worried.
What am I going to say to this woman when the second book is bad and I can't publish it?
He was expecting it to be bad.
No, he was afraid it might be because, I mean, they always say everybody's got one book.
and he was expecting, thinking it might possibly be bad.
He was delighted with it, thank God.
So where was the general response to the first book?
I had a wonderful review for my first book in the Times, and I had one of the best put-downs I've ever had in my life.
I was walking down the street in my little town, and I met a fellow novelist who was a failure,
And he said, how are you?
And I said, I'm walking on air.
I'm so happy because I've had a lovely reviewing of times.
And he said, Nicholas Shakespeare's so kind.
So wonderful.
And I think there's no more wonderful feeling than to have your book accepted.
Wonderful.
My first book has been published this summer by Holmes.
And you're feeling marvelous.
And I'm 52 years old almost.
And I'm...
I don't particularly think I'm old to be published by a person.
Of course we're not.
Fifty-two.
Of course not.
I've been working on it for eight years, too.
It's really quite lovely.
We just closed the galley on it this week in my dust jackets.
We got picked up by a small book club here.
Yeah, I'm feeling ready.
Very exciting.
It is, but there's also this anxiety, too, isn't it?
Oh, terrible.
It never gets me better.
Each time I...
finished book.
I've been terrified.
It's like sending your child out into the world.
It's funny.
I just sent out the desk jacket picture to my editor, and I had a couple more corrections.
I said, please.
He said, Nick, you have to let it go.
He said, this is exactly what you're saying.
There comes a point.
He said, it's beautiful.
We love it.
But Natalie said you have to release it and let it go, and it'll be fine.
You can't change it anymore.
Can't do anymore.
And then the world is there, really, to criticize and write reviews and pick on it.
And that's fine.
And it's going to be read by a whole lot of people I've never met in my life.
And I'm always terrified.
Are you?
Do you hear from a lot of readers?
I get a lot of vessels, yes.
extraordinary cross-section of people from the age of 14 to sort of 19.
No kidding.
So there's no profile of your readers?
No.
And men and women.
I remember getting a wonderful letter from a lawyer in Chicago who said, for several years, my wife and daughters have been bullying me to read your books, and I've held up.
He said, I have just finished the last.
I've read that whole lot on the trot, and it is four in the morning.
And I'm writing to tell you I love them.
And I thought, that is the most lovely little letter I've ever had.
And a month or two later, I was signing in Russia.
I wrote back to him, of course.
I was signing books in London.
And two very tall American girls bent over to the desk I was sitting at and said, you wrote to our pa, you thanked him for his letter, and we want you to sign this new book of yours to take home to Chicago.
That is very rewarding.
Lovely.
It really is.
Really lovely.
How often do you connect with that?
Not very often.
You kind of connect to the book.
Yes.
But actually the physical contact like that.
It's lovely.
Yes.
There's a boy who's been writing to me.
He's a man now.
He's a doctor.
He's been writing to me since he was 14.
And he turned up when I was signing in Hatchard's in London.
He came up to me and said, I'm Jamie, look at the world, it's full of Jamie's.
And I said, yes, of course, wondering who the hell Jamie was.
And then he kept on writing, and he said he was going to Cambridge, and I was going to Cambridge to design, and I thought, I must watch out for Jamie.
And he appeared again, and he had all the cuttings, all the critics.
And he turned up and I was able to say, Jamie, and recognize him.
What is it that you think connected with him?
I don't know.
That's got to be so grand.
He had loved my books and he made all his friends read them.
And I was absolutely delighted.
What a great feeling that was, because you're writing young men.
Young men, girls, old women.
These are books for?
All ages, yes.
It's very beautiful to get letters from young people as well as middle-aged stories.
There was a piece that I read about you, and I think it was a vanity fair or whatever.
But how pertinent is your earlier life?
A member of the aristocracy, so to speak?
Well, I get set up with that.
I was only married to that man for about five years, and I lived to him for three.
And I get very annoyed that it seems to matter that I married somebody with a title.
To me, it's just no importance, whatever.
Well, I saw a wonderful quote from you.
Somebody asked, when did you know that you'd made a mistake?
And I think you said halfway into the cell phone.
That's true.
Classography, yes.
So that was Nicholas, Christopher Hitchens from Banner de Clare.
Yeah, I was very pleased to that.
Yes.
He was quite amusing, because we got off very well, because he'd written an exposé of Mother Teresa.
Oh, I know that piece.
And I so approve that.
I mean, she goes round the world selling... Is he the one who wrote that?
Yes.
I've seen a scapegoat piece on Mother Teresa that she... That he wrote that.
She's a phony.
She goes round to people like Robert Maxwell, who was the biggest crook there ever was, and gets money from the poor, and doesn't spend it on the poor, but builds more contents.
And
Preachers like the Pope, I'm a Catholic and I say what I like about him.
Preachers like the Pope, they've got more and more children, more and more little Catholics.
I think it's so wicked.
That's interesting.
I also read about your, you converted to Catholicism, isn't that right?
Because you love Latin.
Yes, I love the theater of the Catholic Church.
I love Latin.
It was about spiritual.
Yes, spiritual.
I also had read Théard de Chardin.
Have you ever read him?
No, I'm sorry.
He was a Jesuit priest who was excommunicated by the church.
He spent the large part of his life in China.
He's now looked upon as a saint.
He's a philosopher.
And he wrote extremely obtruse books.
And I remember when my husband, who was highly intelligent, said, I can't make him tell you these books.
But I was absorbed in them.
And I cooked it up.
And then also I read Timon Weil.
Do you remember her?
And she influenced me.
She wouldn't become a Catholic.
She influenced me.
And as a child, we lived in Italy.
And my mother used to take us to Catholic churches to listen to the sermons to improve our Italian.
Not for any other reason.
said we'd hear, she thought, good Italian.
Well, of course, the bishop or the Monsignore might have had a terrible Italian accent for what she knew.
But I loved the smell of innocence and the beauty of it.
And that had great attraction to me.
Whereas my husband came to Catholicism through Dostoevsky.
Interesting way.
My background is Greek.
And of course, there's the Greek Orthodox Church.
The Greek Orthodox Church, the gain out of this world.
Beautiful.
And of course, the Greek Easter was just this past weekend.
And that is always, I mean, we go once a year just because it's theater.
It's theater and wonderful music.
With that one candle that comes forward.
Yes.
And this flood of fire just kind of.
It sweeps back.
It's really wonderful.
It's really uplifting.
I don't know necessarily in a spiritual way, but it's theater, and it's art, and we go to the theater.
And it'll come away feeling great.
And the incense goes up to the place.
And the same with the Greek or the Russian Orthodox.
It's more of the deep voices.
Greek, you have.
They're the same church, basically.
There's chants.
Very lovely.
Very nice.
And I love the Gregorian chants, too.
It was a program of Gregorian chants that my wife and I watched for a while back.
It was quite moving.
We get them on disc now.
We get them on tape from Solemne in France.
And actually, the most beautiful is the Masters of the Dead.
I have them.
I play them a lot.
They're very good to work, too.
They're peaceful.
They're marvelous.
from all this time.
I call myself a French Catholic because I'm such a bad one.
I love your reasoning for becoming a Philly because of the Latin and the pageantry and all this other stuff.
It's kind of fun.
How do you write longhand?
I can't type.
I'm the last of the Luddites.
I hate anything mechanical.
I write longhand when I'm sufficiently
satisfied.
I could have typed up by somebody else.
And then do you revise again?
Probably revise, but by the time it goes to her, I've revised and revised.
Are you serendipitous, or are these things fairly well plotted and outlined?
No, the book usually builds up as I go along.
I may know when I start a book, I may know the end, or I may know the middle, or I may know the beginning.
In one book, I knew the end.
and I had to work out how was this end that happened.
What a great country.
My sex was not all become my law, and I wanted to try and describe the atmosphere as I knew it when I was young in the war.
The people of my generation are a bit younger, what we got up to.
And it was a very odd atmosphere.
If you haven't lived in it,
can't understand it.
It's very erotic for one thing and very exciting and people will do things they wouldn't do otherwise and might not have time again.
And I knew a lot of people who were fighting and a lot of my friends got killed and actually a lot of women were getting killed as well as civilians.
But it was a very strange
at the Strandee, which I've never known the lack of since.
And I wanted to put that down on PayPal, and I'm told I succeeded by people of my generation.
That's pretty gratifying.
The fellow who wrote the manuscript, he was almost embarrassed to ask you about that.
It was an awful lot.
Nobody wasted any time.
It went on all the way.
You haven't had any degree of reticence about that.
You talk about being a shy person in general, but it doesn't seem to affect you in your writing.
In writing, no.
Operal sex is part of life.
It's in everything.
It's in music.
It's in painting.
literatures and everything.
You can't write a book without it.
Yes, we're writing about some scientific subjects, even then.
And it doesn't die.
People think there's a wonderful... I'm always asked, you know, why... In other words, why, as you're so old, do you write sexy books?
I mean, you forgot about it.
I didn't ask that quite.
You didn't ask.
Stupid people ask me.
And there's no moment in life.
There's a moment when you shut off.
There's no more sex.
When does that happen?
I'd like to know.
Never.
I hope it never happens.
In fact, if anything, I think we appreciate it more.
Yes.
I'm not going to think of too much of your time.
I wonder if you'd be kind enough to inscribe the
Indeed I will.
I have lots of pencils.
This is done by a designer?
They wanted to revamp my paperbacks with all of my previous books.
And they started sending me these photographs, and the first lot were bad, but they've got some rather good ones now, and for the paperback.
The problem with that is... It looks neat.
It's quite a smart color.
It's lovely, but it gives a visual... I wonder, do you see your characters?
Do you have a visual image of what they look like?
Well, there's very little description in that book of what they look like.
They describe her... I mean, for you.
Yes, for me.
Yes, I do see them, not very often, not complete.
But that's not a variance with what you see?
No, that's more or less all right.